---
title: "Plague in Athens, 430 BC"
date: 2020-09-15T14:54:13+02:00
draft: false
---

Note
: Thucydides wrote an eye-witness account of the plague of Athens in 430 BC in
his _History of the Peloponnesian War_. It is estimated that the plague killed
75,000 - 100,000 people.

The disease began, it is said, in Ethiopia beyond Egypt, and then descended into
Egypt and Libya and spread over the greater part of the King's territory. Then
it suddenly fell  upon the city of Athens, and attacked first the inhabitants of
Peiraeus... I shall describe its actual course, explaining the symptoms, from
the study of which a person should be best able, having knowledge of it
beforehand, to recognize if it should ever break out again. For I had the
disease myself and saw others sick of it.


That year, as was agreed by all, happened to be unusually free from disease so
far as regards the other maladies; but if anyone was already ill of any disease
all terminated in this. In other cases from no obvious cause, but suddenly and
while in good health, men were seized first with intense heat of the head, and
redness and inflammation of the eyes, and the parts inside the mouth, both the
throat and the tongue, immediately became blood-red and exhaled an unnatural and
fetid breath. In the next stage sneezing and hoarseness came on, and in a short
time the disorder descended to the chest, attended by severe coughing. And when
it settled in the stomach, that was upset, and vomits of bile of every kind
named by physicians ensued, these also attended by great distress; and in most
cases ineffectual retching followed producing violent convulsions, which
sometimes, abated directly, sometimes not until long afterwards. Externally, the
body was not so very warm to the touch; it was not pale, but reddish, livid and
breaking out in small blisters and ulcers. But internally it was consumed by
such a heat that the patients could not bear to have on them the lightest
coverings or linen sheets, but wanted to be quite uncovered and would have liked
best to throw themselves into cold water -- indeed many of those who were not
looked after did throw themselves in cisterns -- so tormented were they by
thirst which could not be quenched; and it was all the same whether they drank
much or little.

They were also beset by restlessness and sleeplessness which never abated. And
the body was not wasted while the disease was at its height but resisted
surprisingly the ravages of the disease, so that when the patients died, as most
of them did on the seventh or ninth day from the internal heat, they still had
some strength left; or if they passed the crisis, the disease went down into the
bowels, producing there a violent ulceration, and at the same time an acute
diarrhoea set in, so that in this later stage most of them perished through
weakness caused by it. For the malady, starting from the head where it was first
seated, passed down until it spread through the whole body, and if one got over
the worst, it seized upon the extremities at last and left its marks there; for
it attacked the privates and fingers and toes, and many escaped with the loss of
these, though some lost their eyes also. In some cases, the sufferer was
attacked immediately after recovery by loss of memory, which extended to every
object alike, so that they failed to recognize either themselves or their
friends... And the most dreadful thing about the whole malady was not the
despondency of the victims, when they once became aware they were sick, for
their minds straightaway yielded to despair and gave themselves up for lost
instead of resisting, but also the fact that they became infected by nursing one
another and died like sheep...

But in addition to the trouble under which they already laboured, the Athenians
suffered another hardship owing to the crowding into the city of the people
from the country districts; and this affected the new arrivals especially. For
since no houses were available for them and they had to live in huts that were
stifling in the hot season, they perished in wild disorder. Bodies of dying men
lay one upon another, and half-dead people rolled about in the streets, and in
their longing for water, near all the fountains. The temples, too, in which they
had quartered themselves were full of the corpses of those who had died in them;
for the calamity which weighed upon them was so overpowering that men, not
knowing what was to become of them, became careless of all law, sacred as
profane. And the customs which they had hitherto observed regarding burial were
all thrown into confusion, and they buried their dead each one as he could. And
many resorted to shameless modes of burial because so many members of their
households had already died that they lacked the proper funeral materials.
Resorting to other people's pyres, some, anticipating those who had raised them,
would put on their own dead and kindle the fire; others would throw the body
they were carrying upon one which was already burning and go away.
